blog post: shipping is a state of mind (#2454)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2024-06-17-shipping-is-a-state-of-mind.md

right away might seem like giving up on QA and just pushing out changes without
further control, but it’s actually quite the opposite. Thorough testing is even
more important than it is with legacy release processes. In order to even be
able to deploy dozens or hundreds of times per day, things can’t regularly go
wrong in production and require rollbacks. Not only would that lead to unhappy
users, it would also be an impediment to the process as such and eventually
bring it to a halt.

When merging PRs directly to and deploying from the `main` branch, testing works
a bit differently than with legacy release processes though. While those
processes have a central `release` branch that undergoes QA and thus acts as a
safety net, that safety net no longer exists when deploying from `main` right
after merge. Instead all testing needs to happen before a PR is merged. As there
are several PRs at any given time, all of those have to be tested in parallel.
That necessarily implies:

**Manual testing has no place in such processes or modern software development
in general! Teams that test manually will be slower, less efficient, and ship
worse quality than the ones who don’t. [^1]**

> A solid, automated testing setup, that enables teams to ship constantly end

Reviewer: I don't know why this is coming through as three changes, seems like a github bug

  [BackstopJS](https://github.com/garris/BackstopJS) can surface visual changes
  that might not have been intentional.
- **Performance:** Even performance can be tested automatically to some extent.
  While it might not be feasible to run complete load tests for every PR,
  setting up benchmarks for critical parts of the system or using tools like
  [Lighthouse](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse) to detect performance
  regressions in web apps is often straight-forward.
- **Security:** What’s true for performance is true for security as well. It
  might not be possible to do a full penetration test for every PR but detecting
  typical security holes automatically is well possible in most cases.
- **Testing the deployment:** This is often overlooked but testing deployments
  before actually deploying is a critical piece of a solid testing setup as
  well, in particular for server backends and deployments that include database
  migrations (after all, production data always looks different than you think).
  Not only will testing deployments avoid potential downtimes due to e.g.
  failing migrations but also will it ensure a smooth process by preventing

>   rollbacks from being necessary.

Author: I think canary deployments are different since you're doing those when actually deploying to production already (which is after merging to `main`) – I think in reality doing what I suggest here would typically mean setting up an ad-hoc (preview) environment, running the deployment on that, and in particular running any migrations against a fork/snapshot of the production database.

>   rollbacks from being necessary.

Reviewer: Ok, I see 👍 maybe quickly mention that, then, or else it might be too abstract

>   rollbacks from being necessary.

Author: I'm specifically mentioning migrations though?

>   rollbacks from being necessary.

Reviewer: failing migrations on production is an important problem to catch through deployment testing - but the question that came up to me while reading this was "yes, that would definitely be nice - but how exactly?". And cloned production envs with automatically anonymized data is it. Might be worth mentioning so it's less abstract? but your call

>   rollbacks from being necessary.

Author: ok sure, why not – added

The idea is to, for every PR, boot up an environment that simulates the
production system as it will look once the respective PR is merged. E.g. for a
PR for a web frontend app, an instance of that frontend with the code from the
PR is set up and connected to a dedicated instance of the backend server it
speaks to at the revision of the backend code that’s currently running in
production. The dedicated URL to that system can then be shared with
stakeholders to preview and approve the changes in the PR or ask for
modifications if there e.g. was a misunderstanding. Once the PR is merged, the
preview system can be automatically torn down again.

Services like Netlify of Vercel offer support for setting up preview systems for
frontend apps automatically out-of-the-box. On the server side, there are
services like Heroku and ArgoCD that have support for preview systems and even
setting up a custom process is an option with manageable complexity in many
cases. The challenging part is typically making a well-defined and realistic
dataset available to these systems so that stakeholder know e.g. how to log in
to these systems and have actual data to play with. Modern database providers

> like [Neon](https://neon.tech) make setting up such systems easier with support

Author: There's quite a few of those atm – generally, there's movement in the market to – after e.g. Netlify have made it trivial to have preview envs for frontend apps – take the next steps and make preview systems trivial for the entire stack.

before executing them, things can go wrong occasionally. If that happens, it
must be easy to revert the deployment to fix the production system and clear the
path for the next deployment that’s likely already waiting.

### 4. Observing

Of course teams will want to know whether the changes they deployed actually
work in production as intended. Tracking aspects like error rates, performance
metrics but also usage metrics and similar data is essential to remain on top of
what’s actually happening on the production systems. Are things running
smoothly? Has performance regressed since the last deployment? Has usage of a
particular feature gone down significantly which might indicate a bug that has
gone unnoticed?

While the need to have observability in place is not controversial in the
industry, in reality the collected data is often not looked at by anyone. Every
engineer has seen Grafana dashboards that nobody has looked at in weeks and
months or Sentry projects with 1000s of unresolved errors that just end up being
ignored as they are overwhelming anyway. Teams that operate at peak efficiency
will look at their data and at least be aware of sudden spikes that often

> indicate things going differently than they should have.

Author: Yes, I think that would be a good addition.

perspectives and needs of the other stakeholder groups.

They ship better quality because of the solid and comprehensive testing pipeline
which they not only need to prevent shipping bugs to their users but in
extension, to make their process possible at all and keep it going smoothly.

Their users benefit from accelerated value delivery due to the absence of delays
in the workflow. That gives the teams faster access to user feedback and thus
allows them to be more aligned with their users’ needs at all times.

Finally teams that ship constantly and continuously are reported to have
improved morale across the board – from product people to designers and
engineers. In the end, all software we build, we build to end up in the hands of
users. The shorter and smoother the path towards that goal is, the more
satisfaction people will get from their work and the more motivated they will
be. As Charity Majors puts it:

> [People] who have worked on teams with a short delivery cycle are unwilling to
> ever work anywhere else again. […]
>
> No[body] ever got burned out from shipping too much. [People] get burned out
> from shipping too little.
>

> > <author>[Charity Majors](https://charity.wtf)</author>

Reviewer: beautiful

---
title: "Shipping Is a State of Mind"
authorHandle: marcoow
tags: [process]
bio: "Marco Otte-Witte"
description:

>   "Marco Otte-Witte explains how for the leading teams in the industry shipping

Author: I want to have the fact that this talks about what leading teams in the industry do in the beginning to raise interest

changes are deployed to production – what you could call the "deployment delay”.

### Deployment Delays

Assuming an engineer merges their feature branch at the beginning of a 2 week
sprint, the `release` branch is branched off by the end of the sprint and then
undergoes QA for 1 week before being deployed: the delay between merge and
deployment is 3 weeks! That has a number of negative consequences:

- **Constant risk of delayed rework:** During the period between merging a
  feature branch and it undergoing QA and finally being deployed, there is the
  risk of having to go back to the changes to fix things that come up during QA
  or after deployment. If that happens and indeed things need to be fixed later,
  the engineer has to get back to code they last touched weeks ago potentially.
  In the meantime they have moved on though and started to work on something
  else. They will now have to stop working on that new task and build up the
  mental model for the old task again to be able to fix the bug that was found.
  At the same time, since work on the new task does not progress anymore while
  the engineer fixes the problem in the old code, other engineers that might

>   depend on the new task might end up being blocked – in the worst case causing

Author: let's leave this – it's not like this always happens which is why I'm saying worst case.

  subsequent changes easier
- then the user accounts model has to be changed to model the relation to the
  external authentication provider
- …and existing user data has to be migrated
- finally, the UI needs to be build
- …and translated

Instead of doing all this in one long-lived branch that is only merged back when
all the changes are made,

![diagram showing a feature branch with a number of commits/steps](/assets/images/posts/2024-06-17-shipping-is-a-state-of-mind/feature-branch.png)

the same changes can be done in multiple, small branches, that can each be
merged back individually with a much shorter turnover time, leaving the main
branch in a consistent state at all times:

![diagram showing the same commits/steps as in the above image, separated into individual branches](/assets/images/posts/2024-06-17-shipping-is-a-state-of-mind/task-branches.png)

That way, both problems of long-lived feature branches mentioned above are
solved: shorter lived branches with a shorter turnover time diverge less and
branches of different engineers have a lower risk of being incompatible. Also,
since the scope of changes in each branch is much smaller, and branches are

> continuously integrated with the main branch much more often, there’s a smaller

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
continuously integrated with the main branch, there’s a smaller
```

chance for conflicts when merging back.

### ~~Shortening~~ Removing the deployment delay

> The other big problem with legacy release process is the deployment delay as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The other big problem with legacy release process is the deployment delay, as
```

explained above – the artificial delay resulting out of the process between
making a change (and merging it back to some mainline) and releasing the change
to production. Efficient teams shorten that delay to 0 by simply removing it
altogether – every set of changes that a developer merges back to the mainline
via a PR is released to production instantly:

![diagram showing the same commits/steps in individual branches with deployments after each branch is merged](/assets/images/posts/2024-06-17-shipping-is-a-state-of-mind/task-deployments.png)

> _While this sounds like it might not be always possible, e.g. since users cannot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_While this sounds like it might not always be possible, since, for example, users cannot
```

be confronted with half-done UIs, remember that releasing something to
production does not necessarily mean exposing it to (all) users. You can
leverage techniques like feature flags or canary deployments to limit the
visibility of things that are still under active development._

Removing the deployment delay solves all of the problems related to it in legacy
release processes:

- **Smaller, less risky deployments:** since the amount of changes in each
  deployment is much smaller, fewer things can go wrong. And if anything goes
  wrong, it’s much easier to find the root cause since the amounts of changes

>   that need to be examined is much smaller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  that need to be examined is considerably smaller.
```

- **No delay between completion of a task and potential rework:** since each
  branch/task is deployed immediately after its completion, the deployment is an
  integral part of the work on the task. If anything goes wrong during
  deployment or on production right after, the developer will still be “on” the
  task anyway. Only if the deployment has been completed successfully can the
  task be considered done and the developer will move on to the next thing,
  knowing they will not have to get back to what they worked on before.
- **No artificial wait time for users:** deploying changes immediately after
  they have been completed means there’s no systemic wait time for users – they
  benefit from fixes and new features as soon as those have been implemented.
  That also means the product development team gets feedback from users as fast
  as possible and can correct their course if necessary without continuing to
  move in the wrong direction for days, weeks, or months in the worst case.

## Shipping based on pipelines

> This might raise the question why not all teams are working like this, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This might raise the question of why not all teams are using this approach, and,
```

Author: ```suggestion
This might raise the question of why not all teams work like this, and
```

> consequently, what teams that work like this have that teams that use legacy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consequently, what do teams that work like this have that teams using legacy
```

> release process don’t have. The answer to that question is they have top-notch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
release process don’t. The answer to that question is that they have top-notch
```

infrastructure and shipping pipelines. Teams that are in a state of shipping
constantly stand on the shoulders of highly integrated and automated
infrastructure that enables an efficient and stable process. A well oiled
shipping pipeline covers testing, previewing, deploying, and observing.

### 1. Testing

Merging every PR directly to the `main` branch and shipping it to production
right away might seem like giving up on QA and just pushing out changes without
further control, but it’s actually quite the opposite. Thorough testing is even

> more important than it is with legacy release processes. In order to even be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more important than it is with legacy release processes. In order to be
```

able to deploy dozens or hundreds of times per day, things can’t regularly go
wrong in production and require rollbacks. Not only would that lead to unhappy

> users, it would also be an impediment to the process as such and eventually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
users, it would also be an impediment to the process and eventually
```

Author: let's leave this

bring it to a halt.

When merging PRs directly to and deploying from the `main` branch, testing works

> a bit differently than with legacy release processes though. While those

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a bit differently than with legacy release processes. While those
```

processes have a central `release` branch that undergoes QA and thus acts as a
safety net, that safety net no longer exists when deploying from `main` right

> after merge. Instead all testing needs to happen before a PR is merged. As there

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
after merge. Instead, all testing needs to happen before a PR is merged. As there
```

are several PRs at any given time, all of those have to be tested in parallel.
That necessarily implies:

**Manual testing has no place in such processes or modern software development
in general! Teams that test manually will be slower, less efficient, and ship
worse quality than the ones who don’t. [^1]**

A solid, automated testing setup, that enables teams to ship constantly and
never stop, covers all relevant aspects:

- **Functional correctness within subsystems:** This is the foundation for
  thorough testing and provides the fastest feedback loop to developers. The
  subsystem they work on (and they are submitting a PR for) needs to be correct
  within itself.
- **Functional correctness across subsystems:** The next step after guaranteeing
  that each subsystem is correct within itself, is ensuring that subsystems work

>   together as well. It’s possible for e.g. both a client app and the backend it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  together as well. It’s possible for, e.g. both a client app and the backend it
```

>   talks to to be correct within themselves while not working together correctly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  talks, to be correct within themselves while not working together correctly
```

Author: ```suggestion
  talks to, to be correct within themselves while not working together correctly
```

  in combination.
- **Visual correctness:** Unit, integration and other kinds of tests ensure
  correctness but don’t look at an app the same way a real user does. An app can
  be 100% functional while visually broken – sth. that would never be detected
  by a typical test. Tools like [Percy](https://percy.io),
  [Chromatic](https://www.chromatic.com), or
  [BackstopJS](https://github.com/garris/BackstopJS) can surface visual changes
  that might not have been intentional.
- **Performance:** Even performance can be tested automatically to some extent.
  While it might not be feasible to run complete load tests for every PR,
  setting up benchmarks for critical parts of the system or using tools like
  [Lighthouse](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse) to detect performance
  regressions in web apps is often straight-forward.
- **Security:** What’s true for performance is true for security as well. It
  might not be possible to do a full penetration test for every PR but detecting
  typical security holes automatically is well possible in most cases.
- **Testing the deployment:** This is often overlooked but testing deployments

>   before actually deploying is a critical piece of a solid testing setup as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  before actually deploying is a critical piece of a solid testing setup
```

>   well, in particular for server backends and deployments that include database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 in particular for server backends and deployments that include database
```

  migrations (after all, production data always looks different than you think).
  Not only will testing deployments (e.g. by running them on a clone of the

>   production environment) avoid potential downtimes due to e.g. failing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  production environment) avoid potential downtimes due to, for instance, failing
```

>   migrations but also will it ensure a smooth process by preventing rollbacks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  migrations, but it will also ensure a smooth process by preventing rollbacks
```

  from being necessary.

And there’s more – depending on the type of application a team works on, they
might want to test for translation strings being complete for all supported

> locales, external links still being reachable or accessibility requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
locales, external links still being reachable, or accessibility requirements
```

being met.

### 2. Previewing

> Even if pushing out changes to production behind feature flags, developers will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even when pushing out changes to production behind feature flags, developers will
```

need a way to share their work with stakeholders before the changes go to
production. While teams that use legacy release processes often have a central

> staging system that e.g. product managers can access, teams that deploy any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
staging system that, e.g., product managers can access, teams that deploy any
```

change that’s merged to main directly can’t have such a central staging system
anymore – there’s just no central branch that the staging system could be
deployed from before going to production. There can well be multiple staging
systems though – precisely, one per PR. These systems are typically called
“Preview Systems”.

The idea is to, for every PR, boot up an environment that simulates the

> production system as it will look once the respective PR is merged. E.g. for a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
production system as it will look once the respective PR is merged. For example, for a
```

PR for a web frontend app, an instance of that frontend with the code from the
PR is set up and connected to a dedicated instance of the backend server it
speaks to at the revision of the backend code that’s currently running in
production. The dedicated URL to that system can then be shared with
stakeholders to preview and approve the changes in the PR or ask for
modifications if there e.g. was a misunderstanding. Once the PR is merged, the
preview system can be automatically torn down again.

Services like Netlify of Vercel offer support for setting up preview systems for

> frontend apps automatically out-of-the-box. On the server side, there are

Author: the automatic setting up is provided by Netlify out-of-the-box

services like Heroku and ArgoCD that have support for preview systems and even
setting up a custom process is an option with manageable complexity in many
cases. The challenging part is typically making a well-defined and realistic

> dataset available to these systems so that stakeholder know e.g. how to log in

Author: ```suggestion
dataset available to these systems so that stakeholder know how to log in
```

> to these systems and have actual data to play with. Modern database providers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these systems and have actual data to play with. Modern database providers
```

like [Neon](https://neon.tech) make setting up such systems easier with support
for forking (and anonymizing) the production database for use in preview
systems.

### 3. Deploying

Once changes have been tested and approved by stakeholders on preview systems,
they are good to be merged and be shipped to production. Just like for testing,
one main requirement to consider is:

**Manual deployments have no place in such processes or modern software
development in general! Teams that deploy manually will be slower, less
efficient, and ship systems that are less stable than teams that don’t. [^2]**

Teams that aim to push to production several times per day need a stable, fast,
and reversible deployment process. Stability is essential so randomly failing
deployments don’t cause friction and slow the process (and thus the team’s
velocity) down. A fast deployment process is essential for being able to deploy

> multiple times per day at all – if e.g. a deployment takes 1h, the maximum

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multiple times per day at all – if a deployment takes 1h, the maximum
```

number of deployments in a day is 8, or maybe 9-10 max. That will turn into a
bottleneck even for small teams quickly. Finally, even when testing deployments
before executing them, things can go wrong occasionally. If that happens, it
must be easy to revert the deployment to fix the production system and clear the
path for the next deployment that’s likely already waiting.

### 4. Observing

Of course teams will want to know whether the changes they deployed actually
work in production as intended. Tracking aspects like error rates, performance
metrics but also usage metrics and similar data is essential to remain on top of
what’s actually happening on the production systems. Are things running
smoothly? Has performance regressed since the last deployment? Has usage of a
particular feature gone down significantly which might indicate a bug that has
gone unnoticed?

While the need to have observability in place is not controversial in the
industry, in reality the collected data is often not looked at by anyone. Every

> engineer has seen Grafana dashboards that nobody has looked at in weeks and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
engineer has witnessed Grafana dashboards that nobody has looked at in weeks
```

> months or Sentry projects with 1000s of unresolved errors that just end up being

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 or Sentry projects with thousands of unresolved errors that just end up being
```

> ignored as they are overwhelming anyway. Teams that operate at peak efficiency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ignored. Teams that operate at peak efficiency
```

Author: ```suggestion
ignored as the amount of data simply is overwhelming. Teams that operate at peak efficiency
```

will look at their data and at least be aware of sudden spikes that often
indicate things going differently than they should have. In fact, some of these
teams even go a step further by collecting their own custom metrics or
customizing how traces are recorded and woven together to get the most of their
data.

## Constant shipping as a driver for true agility

Teams that ship constantly, in small steps, are also more – and I’d say truly –
agile. Teams that follow a legacy release process often work in a pretty
sequential fashion where product management writes a spec, designers build
mockups based on that, and engineers implement those in the final step – that’s
not really agile at all, it’s essentially the very ancient waterfall process,
just with smaller scopes. In contrast, teams that work and ship more granularly
work through the process in many small iterations, closely together the entire
time.

When the goal is to break features or other changes down into steps that are

> each the “smallest-mergable-unit-of-work” possible so that each of these steps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each the “smallest-mergeable-unit-of-work” possible so that each of these steps
```

is also shippable individually, product, design, engineering, and ops have to

> work together on each of these steps. They need to figure out what the next step

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
work together on every step. They need to figure out what the next action
```
